---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Book: The Power of Habit'
subtitle: Why we do what do and how to change
cover-img: 'https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/7/7f/The_Power_of_Habit.jpg'
tags:
- book
---
Review of Charles Duhiggs 'right balance of intellectual seriousness [and]
practical advice on how to break our bad habits'.


I came across this book together with None??? -> Search for receipt @home


* TOC
{:toc}


# Content
If we know how habits work, we have a chance of actually changing them - but
the first step is noticing them.

## Part One: The Habits of Individuals
Habits are processed independently of memories. When chunking together multiple
actions, they can be 'seen' as one activity. The basic habit loop consists of a
cue, a routine, and a reward, whereas the cue and routine meld together.

Habits never really go away after forming, but they can be overpowered by
others. Habits don't help when attempting transfer learning. They are devoid of
the contextual meaning. Slightly modifying cues does not trigger the habit.

While simple and obvious cues and rewards improve habit-forming, a craving is
required to keep driving the habit loop. Anticipation of a reward from
recognizing the cue will result in frustration and craving if the reward does
not follow.

Keeping cue and reward, it is possible to change habits by adapting the
routine. But, you need to be aware of the cues, triggers and rewards. The first
step is noticing the habit triggering, when that happens consistently you can
attempt to change it in some instances. It does take effort.

Something else is required however, to not fall back to old habits: a _belief_
that things will get better with the new habit - or you _will_ fall back when
under pressure.

Belief can emerge during hard times or with the help of communities. Seeing
someone else changing can enable belief in someone else. Belief is necessary to
ultimately make the new behavior stick.

## Part Two: The Habits of Successful Organisations
Some Habits are like dominoes: They enable and facilitate change in other
habits. Keystone habits tend to have only small immediate wins, but since they
propagate, bigger wins follow eventually - when they are followed through with.

Willpower is a muscle, not a skill. Training it in one area will be noticeable
in others. Writing down anticipated challenges and _how to deal with them_
tremendously increases chances of executing, and it requires less willpower.
Willpower thus becomes a habit by choosing certain behaviors ahead of time,
and following the routine. Knowing the reason _why_ and keeping autonomy
improves willpower reserves of subordinates.

Organisations always have institutional habits, it's just a question if they
have been formed deliberately or through rivalries. Rivalries often result in
balanced truces, allowing everyone to get their work done. But keeping these
truces can result in spectacular failures when something goes only slightly
wrong (Just read any technical postmortem analysis). Organizational habits are
more malleable during times of crisis.

Shopping, among other things, is immensely habit-driven. But: They are
different for everyone. People essentially only change their habits in
life-changing events such as moving, job changes, divorce or marriage, etc..
And a pregnancy is among the biggest changes possible, which is why predicting
them is among the most lucrative.

## Part Three: The Habits of Societies
Movements start with strong ties between close acquaintances, they grow with
the weak ties of neighborhoods and communities, and endure with a fresh sense
of identity and ownership due to newly created habits. Weak ties and peer
pressure in general are enormously powerful in keeping people committed, if
they would otherwise lose their social standing.

We tend to do still have choices when sleepwalking, but not in sleep terrors,
which are generated by central pattern generators and look very similar to
following a habit (in an fMRI). Since they are usually unexpected, we have no
fault in their resulting damage. It is different for habits we are actively
aware of: we are responsible for their results, since we could have changed
them.

There is no single formula for changing habits (there are thousands), but here
is a general framework:
1. Identify the routine: figure out cue, routine and reward, track them
2. Experiment with Rewards: Figure out the craving beneath the habit by testing
   if a different reward fulfills the craving
3. Isolate the Cue. Most cues are based on either: Location, Time, Emotional
   State, other People, or prior actions
4. Plan for the cue and modify the routine


# Review
What an entertaining book to read. I'm certainly glad I did.

## Main Takeaways
There are many things I took away from reading this book, but here are the
biggest ones:

### Habits in Depth
As is mentioned in the book, just being _aware_ of habits and noticing them is
half the change. Reading this book allowed me to understand habits at a
fundamental level, though they are obviously different from the habits in
[The Seven Habits of Highly Effective People][7-habits].

Understanding them helped me to start noticing a lot of my own habits, and
others acting on theirs. We truly are surrounded by habits like fish in water.
The next step is to change them, I'm excited to see how that will go.


### Cues as Schelling-Points
While reading the book, it somehow reminded me about [Schelling
Points][schelling], in the sense that once we start with a habit (following the
cue, anticipating reward), it's really hard to stop it. So the sensible
Schelling point for stopping a habit is to avoid having it triggered
altogether, or changing the habit to something more useful or productive.

I noticed that multiple times, particularly when hungry: I knew that if I were
not to eat something within the next few minutes, I would crave sugar later,
making it impossible to avoid the unhealthy option instead of the healthy one.
In short: if I were not to eat something now, I _will_ eat cookies later.

The shelling point is the situation at the moment, if I eat something or not. I
knew that I could stop myself from eating for at least another hour, but I
would not be able to stop myself from eating cookies after the next 15 minutes
if I were to do so.

The options were to eat something immediately, or to eat cookies and regret it
later. That, right there, is a Schelling point, a point which will decide the
ultimate result, even though it is pretty early already. Because what would
follow is an unhealthy habit, and I know that I would be unable to stop it. I
tried and failed before, after all.


### Responsibility for Habits
What I found interesting was how responsibility relates to habits. Since habits
themselves are 'impulsive' and close to impossible to interrupt, how can we be
responsible for following them? The solution is surprisingly simple: We are
responsible for it in the times between following these impulses, as soon as we
become aware that this behavior exists and is damaging to us.

While it has been described this way, I noticed as well that noticing the
activation of habits is the hardest part to changing them. Noticing the cue,
and _not_ acting on it is hard, doing something else instead (which also
satisfies the craving) helps alleviate the situation.

Of course, the best way would be to not encounter the cue again, but
consistently avoiding certain emotional states might be even harder than not
acting on a cue.


### Well-written Stories
I learned something meta as well: I did not realize that stories had that
amount of explanatory power. The author is a NYT journalist, and that really
shines through. The book is absolutely easy to read and understand. The stories
especially are concise to the point, with no bit of unnecessary information,
with every sentence providing new or useful information. The book is better
than most others I've read recently from a literary perspective. It's just so
much more comfortable, easy, and fast to read. I did not know that this was
possible.


## Criticism
This book is absolutely well written. Not only that, the examples are always
concise and precise. They help the explanations tremendously. It's always clear
what it is currently about. It's generally a pleasure to read, and I learned a
lot. Somehow, I wish the book would have been longer.

I would recommend everyone interested in improving their life overall to read
this book. Most habits are harmless, but there are a few, such as gambling,
that can completely control your life. Being aware of habits and their power
increases our chances of creating new useful habits and especially not getting
enslaved to detrimental ones.


## Favorite Quotes
> When a habit emerges, the brain stops fully participating in decision-making.

> That's why signing kids up for piano lessons or sports is so important. It
> has nothing to do with creating a good musician or a five-year-old soccer
> start. [...] When you learn to force yourself to practice for an hour or run
> fifteen laps, you start building self-regulatory strength.

> Starbucks has dozens of routines that employees are taught to use during
> stressful inflection points. [...] Then they practice those plans, again and
> again, until they become automatic.

> For an organisation to work, leaders must cultivate habits that both create a
> real and balanced peace and, paradoxically, make it absolutely clear who's in
> charge.

> You never want a serious crisis to go to waste - Rahm Emanuel

> A movement starts because of the social habits of friendship and the strong
> ties between close acquaintances.
> It grows because of the habits of a community, and the weak ties that hold
> neighborhoods and clans together.
> And it endures because a movement's leaders give participants new habits that
> create a fresh sense of identity and a feeling of ownership.

> Once you know a habit exists, you have responsibility to change it.

[7-habits]: ../2020-09-02-seven-habits/
[schelling]: https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/Kbm6QnJv9dgWsPHQP/schelling-fences-on-slippery-slopes
