---
layout: post
published: true
title: My Books
subtitle: A Room without Books is like a Body without Soul
cover-img: '/assets/img/photo_books.jpg'
tags:
  - book
---
A collection of books I own or want to own, a glimpse on what I am thinking
about sometimes.

This is a collection of book reviews, as well as wishlist for books I want to
have.

I have been an avid reader for most of my life. Still, I only recently
rediscovered physical books, after mostly reading digitally on my Kindle,
[laptop](https://frame.work) and [remarkable](https://remarkable.com).

<!--
I own a lot of books. In fact, so many that I barely have place for new ones.
And yet I still buy new books regularly. Or get them as a present. And I still
like it. And I still want to get more.
-->

* TOC
{:toc}

---
### About This Page
This is a work in progress. Thus, you may find dead links sometimes. This
happens when I reference a book I have read without having published the review
yet. These links will become valid sometime later when the review is published,
or scheduled for release. So yes, you might find posts linked that are not
visible on the front page yet.


<!--
### The Process
Every day after waking up, I first journal for about 30min. About whatever
comes to mind, really. Afterwards, I read. The goal is to read for 30min. If I
do not have any meetings or urgent tasks to do, this easily extends to 60min or
sometimes even 90min.

While reading, I take notes. I published these notes in my first book reviews,
and sometimes still do abridged versions or include them as a comment in HTML.
My review-format settled on a shortened content summary, followed by a review
with key takeaways and criticism, as well as some of my favorite quotes from
the book.
-->

### Existing Book Reviews
This list is most likely up-to-date. You can find, however, and also sorted
according to additional categories (e.g. [leadership][leadership],
[startup][startup] or [financial][financial]) on the [tags][tags] page.

I can recommend some books more than others, but since your situation and taste
probably differs, I have included whom I would recommend the book in each review.

- [From Zero to One - Peter Thiel](../2020-02-01-zero-to-one/)
- [The No Asshole Rule - Robert I. Sutton](../2020-02-28-no-asshole-rule/)
- [Everything is F\*cked - Mark Manson](../2020-06-20-everything-f-cked/)
- [Getting Things Done - David Allen](../2020-07-16-getting-things-done/)
- [The Four Hour Workweek - Tim Ferris](../2020-08-12-four-hour-workweek/)
- [7 Habits of Highly Effective People - Stephen Covey](../2020-09-02-seven-habits/)
- [The Lean Startup - Eric Ries](../2020-09-11-lean-startup/)
- [The Power of Habit - Charles Duhigg](../2020-09-16-power-of-habit/)
- [Ego is the Enemy - Ryan Holiday](../2020-09-23-ego-enemy/)
- [Goal Boss - Will Pemble](../2020-10-12-goalboss/)
- [Make Your Brain Work - Amy Brann](../2020-10-20-brain-work/)
- [Idea Makers - Stephen Wolfram](../2020-10-27-idea-makers/)
- [Extreme Ownership - Jocko Willink](../2020-11-10-extreme-ownership/)
- [12 Rules for Life - Jordan Peterson](../2021-02-10-twelve-rules-for-life/)
- [Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman](../2021-03-18-joking-feynman/)
- [Rich Dad Poor Dad - Robert Kiyosaki](../2021-04-14-rich-dad-poor-dad/)
- [Drive - Daniel H. Pink](../2021-06-12-drive/)
- [The Personal MBA - Josh Kaufmann](../2021-08-18-personal-mba/)
- [Financial Intelligence for Entrepreneurs - Karen Berman](../2021-08-25-financial-intelligence/)
- [Project Hail Mary - Andy Weir](../2021-09-09-project-hail-mary/)
- [Stillness Is the Key - Ryan Holiday](../2022-09-09-stillness/)

<!--
#### Read with No Review Coming
This is usually the case for Books I read before 2020, and a bunch of fiction.
- 1984 - 
- Brave New World - Huxley
- Daemon - Daniel Suarez
- ...
-->

### Reviews in Progress
A list of Book reviews currently in progress -- in various states. You'll see
them published eventually.
- Miracle Morning - Hal Elrod
- Why We Sleep - Matthew Walker
- Talk Like TED - Carmine Gallo
- Liftoff - Eric Berger
- Factfulness - Hans Rosling
- The One Thing - Gary Keller
- A Thousand Brains - Jeff Hawkins
- Du Bist Genug - Ichiro Kishimi, Fumitake Koga
- A Map that Reflects the Territory: Essays by the LessWrong Community
- The Big Five For Life - John Strelecky
- Turn the Ship Around! - David Marquet
- Superforecasting - Philip Tetlock


### Currently Reading
This list does not include stuff I read on the internet (a lot) or scientific
articles.

- 13 Things Mentally Strong People Don't Do - Amy Morin
- Sapiens - Yuval Noah Harari
- The Owners Manual for the Brain


### On my Bookshelf
A list of books currently sitting on my bookshelf. Some bought, some gifted. I
will read them eventually. What I read next depends on what I'm currently
researching or interested in, and is thus subject to arbitrary fluctuation.

- leading without authority - Keith Ferrazzi
- Why Nations Fail - Daron Acemoglu
- How to Read a Financial Report - John Tracy
- How to Win Friends and Influence People - Dale Carnegie
- Homo Deus - Yuval Noah Harari
- Thinking, Fast and Slow - Daniel Kahnemann
- Atomic Habits - James Clear
- Superintelligence - Nick Bostrom
- To Sell is Human - Daniel Pink
- Making Evil - Julia Shaw
- Start with Why - Simon Sinek
- crucial conversations - Patterson, Grenny, McMillan, Switzler
- Never Eat Alone - Keith Ferrazzi
- Beyond Order - Jordan Peterson
- What Got You Here Won't Get You There - Marshall Goldsmith
- Brave new World - Huxley
- One Up on Wall Street - Peter Lynch
- How to Avoid a Climate Disaster - Bill Gates
- the art of the good life - Rolf Dobelli
- The Brothers Karamazov - Dosteovsky
- Pride and Prejudice - Jane Austin
- ...

<!--
- The Confident Mind: A Battle-Tested Guide - Nate Zinsser
- How the World Really Works - Vaclav Smil
-->


### Wishlist
List of books I wish to get in the future, and would probably buy when I see
them somewhere. Any one of these would make a great gift to me. I highlighted
some I currently find particularly interesting.

- Good to Great - James C. Collins
- Meditations - Marcus Aurelius
- **Ignition!**: An informal history of liquid rocket propellants - John D. Clark
- The Hard Thing about Hard Things - Ben Horowitz
- **The 4 Disciplines of Execution** - C. McChesney, S. Covey, J. Huling
- The Six Pillars of Self-Esteem - Nathaniel Branden
- How to Lie with Statistics - Darrell Huff
- **What We Owe The Future** - William McAskill
- SPIN Selling - Neil Rackham
- The 48 Laws of Power - Robert Greene
- Business Adventures: Twelve Classic Tales From the World of Wall Street - John Brooks
- The Selfish Gene - Richard Dawkins
- **Structures**: Or Why Things Don't Fall Down - J. E. Gordon
- Steve Jobs - Walter Isaacson
- The Wealth of Nations - Adam Smith
- The Feynman Lectures on Physics (I already have one ...)
- **Blitzscaling** - Reid Hoffman
- Getting It Done - Roger Fisher
- Einstein - Walter Isaacson
- Guns, Germs, and Steel - Jared Diamond
- A World-Class Education - Vivien Stewart
- The Headspace Guide to Meditation and Mindfulness - Andy Puddicombe
- SuperFreakonomics - Steven D. Levitt
- Principles: Life and Work - Ray Dalio
- Measure What Matters - John Doerr
- Range: Why Generalists Triumph in a Specialized World - David J. Epstein
- Why We're Polarized - Ezra Klein
- Man's Search for Meaning - Viktor E. Frankl
- Status Anxiety - Alain de Botton
- The Strategy Paradox: Why Committing to Success Leads to Failure (And What to do About It) - Michael E. Raynor
- ...

#### Novel / Fiction
- Asimov' Foundation Series (I already have 'Ende der Ewigkeit')
- Dosteovsky: Demons, Crime and Punishment (I already have 'The Brothers Karamazov')
- The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress - Robert A. Heinlein
- Basically anything by Greg Egan (I already have 'Diaspora' and 'Luminous')
- The Great Gatsby - F. Scott Fitzgerald
- ...

<!--
### Books I want to re-read
- Good Strategy, Bad Strategy - Richard Rumelt
- Digital Dementia - Manfred Spitzer
- Moonwalking with Einstein - Joshua Fouer
- 1984 - George Orwell
-->

<!--
Book circle book list order
1. Seven Habits
2. Rich Dad Poor Dad
3. Drive
4. GTD
5. Miracle Morning
6. Why We Sleep
7. Talk like TED
8. Factfulness
9. The ONE Thing
10. Du Bist Genug
???
XX. The Big Five for Life
-->

---
**Edit**: last updated on 2022-09-16

[leadership]: ../tags/#leadership
[startup]: ../tags/#startup
[financial]: ../tags/#financial
[tags]: https://www.fkarg.me/tags/
