---
layout: post
published: true
title: Writing
subtitle: trends of written text
comments: false
tags:
- thoughts
---

I'm an avid reader. On average I read about ~10-20 news articles (I should
reduce that) and 3 chapters from various books, as well as linked or referenced
blog articles or otherwise interesting pieces I stumble across on the internet
each day. And then I started writing (on this blog) myself. And I noticed some
trends.


* TOC
{:toc}


## General Observations

Writing styles are vastly different. And as much as they are different, they
tend to have some really similar characteristics. While one person is able to
use fancier words, someone else is able to write with more humor. Or with more
examples, making it easier to follow and understand.

The best ones, as I've noticed have one thing in common. Regardless of humor or
fancy words, the best are simply precise - facilitating easy and accurate
understanding. Usually, without beating much around the bush.

Sometimes I try to emulate something I found really helpful: exploring the same
idea in different facets, from different angles. Usually this is done from no
more than three angles, as to avoid it getting repetitive. These angles tend to
clarify core mechanics, usually unexpected ones, helping to create a better
understanding for the limits of the currently explained concept.


## Value in Writing

Being able to write concise pieces of text which allow others to easily
comprehend the message, is a noteworthy skill. It's not just useful for
blogging. It's essential for writing good documentation, specification, and to
communicate well. Being able to articulate yourself well, even if it takes
time, is a skill that pays off in the long run.

It forces you to linearize your thoughts. As soon as thoughts are written down,
they are static, much unlike their original counterparts. Thoughts are
ever-changing, and having to _hold one down_ seems like a crippling move at
first - and sometimes it is. Most good pieces of text need multiple rewrites
before the right words have been found. Writing thoughts down makes apparent
how clear and thought-through they actually are. Sometimes they are just one
big mess, and getting them linearized is one of the most useful parts. It
allows for an easy descent in intricate details, should it be necessary.


## Length is Not Important


Most good articles or chapters<sup>[1](#footnote1)</sup> are either
considerably short (most of them) or really long and detailed. Short ones give
you a push in a direction to think about, and then 'leave you alone again' -
intricate stories are rare in them.

Long ones are different: they consist of multiple rather short conceptually
closed parts. Explanation and examples, sometimes done by stories, are not
rare. They are either an overview on some broad topic or a really in-depth
exploration of some characteristic or idea. But the shorter conceptually closed
parts are referenced again and again from others, and reading just one of them
would leave you with a sense of missing something from the bigger picture.


## Closing Thoughts

I really love reading - it is awesome to internalize large amounts of
information in little time. The really awesome thing about books is that you
can learn new things from people you might not naturally be in contact with.
This includes professors or otherwise really successful people from around the
world as well as others long dead. You don't need to bother the author -
imagine listening to me telling you about the thoughts you read here.
As much as I like talking about them, it would take both your time and mine -
and it would take mine again and again every single time someone starts
reading.



---
#### Footnotes

<a name="footnote1">1</a>: With this I mean chapters in non-fiction books, which try to explain concepts.

<!--
Notes
- reason to write this: read a lot recently, and noticed some trends
- writing styles differ
- best ones: concise and accurate descriptions
- not too much content (easier reading)
- exploring the same idea from different angles (more than one, but not too many)
- describing and presenting things in written form is a noteworthy skill
- makes apparent the clarity of thought
- best pieces are rather short -> leaving your mind wandering
- or really in-depth and detailed
- allows you to learn from people, without having to interact with them (taking their time)
-->
