---
layout: post
published: true
title: 'Book: Drive'
subtitle: The Surprising Truth About What Motivates Us
cover-img: 'https://m.media-amazon.com/images/I/41DfCl8b1TL.jpg'
tags:
- book
---
Review of Daniel H. Pink's 'book that will change how you think and transform
how you live'.

I would recommend this book especially to those regularly frustrated or
stressed, or otherwise with a high chance of burnout, but everyone else as
well.

This was the third suggested book of our Book Circle, which I read in the end
of October 2020. The second was [Rich Dad, Poor Dad][rich-dad], the fourth was
[Getting Things Done][gtd].


* TOC
{:toc}

---
# Content
## Part One: A New Operating System
'Motivation' has three flavors, or 'operating system' versions as they are
being referred to in the book.
- 1.0: Getting everything needed for survival: food, shelter, safety, and other basic needs
- 2.0: 'Carrot and Stick' - extrinsic motivation based on pleasure and pain or monetary reward
- 3.0: Intrinsic motivation, which can be far more powerful than extrinsic motivation

I was really surprised by how much performance suffered and focus narrowed when
monetary rewards are offered, especially for problem-solving tasks. These are
the main societal tasks nowadays. I liked that a fair amount of studies is
cited throughout.

The offering of money is a strong signal for its inherent 'work'-attribute.
Monetary penalties switch moral frameworks to a utility-based one (they get
paid for it), while the punished behavior will increase (double or more) for
small penalties.

Monetary incentives _do_ work for brain-dead-simple tasks, though: there is no
intrinsic motivation that could get killed in the first place. To increase
effectiveness for these tasks: acknowledge it's boring, explain _why_ it's
necessary, and let everyone do it their own way.

Unexpected rewards (monetary or otherwise) work well for intrinsically
motivating tasks, until they become _expected_ entitlement.

There is a model as well: Type X people are those mainly motivated by extrinsic
properties, Type I are mainly motivated intrinsically - they always outperform
Type X beavior _over the long term_.

{: .box-note}
TLDR; Extrinsic rewards are bad for motivation on tasks that are, or could be,
inherently interesting.


## Part Two: The Three Elements
Autonomy is _acting with a choice_ instead of only being demanded things
continuously. Autonomy emerges when people have control over their task, time,
technique and team. Have 20% of total work time as creative time, during which
people are allowed to do whatever - it will increase overall productivity and
employee satisfaction. A number of companies do that with resounding success.

The urge to master something new and engaging is the best predictor for
productivity. To master something, the environment needs to be 'flow'-friendly:
clear objectives with quick feedback. Have learning goals, not just productivity
goals. Not being allowed to experience 'flow'-moments leads to severe symptoms
of anxiety disorder within 48 hours.

Letting people do what is meaningful to them reduces burnout rates
significantly. This can also mean to explain better _why_ they are doing
something, as well as _what_ the meaning behind an activity is or _how_ the
company depends on a certain success. Benefits include higher levels of
satisfaction, subjective well-being, along with increased productivity while
decreasing anxiety, depression and burnout significantly.

{: .box-note}
TLDR; Intrinsic motivation builds on three pillars: autonomy, mastery, and purpose.


## Part Three: Type I Toolkit
Optimize for situations producing 'flow' by sampling throughout the day while
looking for patterns. There is no need to be flawless, but have small
improvements each day. Take longer sabbaticals to do what you want, and review
your learning as well as performance goals every month. Do deliberate practice
regularly, and get feedback.

Make sure everyone is aligned on purpose and mission. Do not make your teams
compete within. Pay above average, or add other perks: make money a non-issue
for your employees.

Praise effort as well as strategy instead of intelligence, never couple allowance
to chores for children.

{: .box-note}
TLDR; Set your own goals, do what you _want_, do something where you can get better,
and reward yourself right.


---
# Review
I am glad I read this book. Fundamentally it was nothing new, but the amount
of detail and implications made it absolutely worth reading. 'Drive' provides a
decent [gears-level understanding][gears-level] of how motivation
works, moreover I can see the same mechanisms working within myself.


## Main Takeaways
- detailed understanding about motivation, and it's mechanisms
- what to do, good working conditions, and what absolutely not to do as an
  employer
- allows for motivational debugging within myself: 'why don't I want to do this?'
- a number of lists with resources at the end of the book

## Criticism
The book is well-structured, has few but good examples along with clear
explanations.  I don't fully agree with the 'versioning' model, but I can see
how it's useful. It felt like the book was repetitive at times. The advice
given can be actioned upon, moreover the book is easily skimmable and usable as
a reference. I especially liked the lists with specific application tips at the
end.

I would recommend everyone to read this book, but especially those regularly
frustrated or stressed, as well as those with jobs that have a high risk of
burnout.

## Favourite Quotes
> [...] external rewards and punishments [...] can work nicely for algorithmic
> tasks. But they can be devastating for heuristic ones. (page 30)

> It is those who are least motivated to pursue extrinsic rewards who
> eventually receive them. (page 46)

> [.] most of the scandals and misbehavior that have seemed endemic to modern
> life involve shortcuts [to external rewards]. (page 51)

> By offering a reward, a principal signals to the agent that the task is
> undesirable. (page 54)

> For routine tasks, which aren't very interesting and don't demand much
> creative thinking, rewards can provide a small motivational booster shot
> without the harmful side effects. (page 62)

> The businesses that offered autonomy grew at four times the rate of the
> control-oriented firms and had one-third the turnover. (page 91)

> [In short], management is not the solution, it's the problem. (page 92)

> [They found] that those who did the best typically spent the most time and
> effort on the mundane activities that readied them for the [challenge]. (page
> 125)

> At the end of each day, ask yourself whether you were better today than you
> were yesterday. (page 155)

<!--
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
# Publication Checklist:
- [ ] Content
    - [ ] Added cover-image
    - [ ] the beginning of the post is clear and a good description
    - [ ] the beginning of each paragraph describes
          the information contained in the paragraph
    - [ ] each paragraph describes at most one idea
    - [ ] the end is on a high note/positive outlook or
          inspirational call to action
    - [ ] Tell them what you're going to tell them. Then tell them.
          Finally, tell them what you told them. - Unknown
- [ ] Grammar and Typos
    - [ ] checked with `pylanguagetool` for typos
    - [ ] checked with `homer` for compulsive hedgers
    - [ ] checked with `homer` for vague words
    - [ ] checked with `homer` for sentence length
- [ ] Details
    - [ ] test-read actual rendered text
    - [ ] checked how it looks like on mobile
- [ ] Publication
    - [ ] scheduled publication
    - [ ] linked in [books][books]
    - [ ] checked if linked in prior/upcoming posts
    - [ ] posted link to review on goodreads
    - [ ] removed this comment
-->

---
[books]: ../2019-09-12-books/
[7-habits]: ../2020-09-02-seven-habits/
[rich-dad]: ../2021-04-14-rich-dad-poor-dad/
[gears-level]: https://www.lesswrong.com/tag/gears-level
[gtd]: ../2020-07-16-getting-things-done/
